• What is Azure Data Factory (ADF)?

Azure Data Factory (ADF) is Microsoft’s fully managed, serverless cloud data integration service. 
It allows you to build, orchestrate, and automate ETL (Extract, Transform, Load) and ELT (Extract, Load, Transform) workflows to move and process data at scale.

• What are the main components of Azure Data Factory? 

Pipelines
Activities
Datasets
Linked Services
Integration Runtime
Triggers

• Does ADF supports streaming workloads?

ADF doesn't support streaming workloads, but it can run databricks notebook where structured streaming or autoloader is used.

• What is Azure Storage Account?
Azure storage account is a cloud container for various Azure storage solutions such as Blob storage, Files Storage, Disk Storage, Table Storage and
Queue storage.

Blob Storage  - For unstructured data text files, pdf, media
Files Storage - cloud file storage
Disk Storage  - for virtual machine disks
Table Storage - NoSQL storage for key-attribute, structured data.
Queue Storage - Messaging storage for reliable, asynchronous communication between application components

• What is Azure Data Lake Storage Gen2?

Azure Data Lake Storage Gen2 (ADLS Gen2) is Microsoft's scalable cloud storage for big data analytics, built on Azure Blob Storage.

Feautures:
 - Built on top of blob storage
 - Hierarchial namespace
 - Hadoop Compatibility
 - Enhanced security
 - Optimized for Analytics
 
----------------- ADF Core Concepts -------------------------
Pipeline
Activity
Dataset
Linked Service
Integration Runtime
Trigger
 
• What is a pipeline?
A pipeline is a logical grouping of activities that perform together a task (e.g., move data from Source A to Sink B).

• What is an activity?
An action performed within a pipeline, such as copying data (Copy Activity) or transforming it (Data Flow Activity).

• Name some important activities.

Copy Activity - move data from Source A to Sink B
Delete Activity - delete data
Validation Activity - Check if file exists before running a pipeline
Get Metadata - retrieves information about your data (files, folders, or tables) without reading the data itself
If Condition - Logical branching
Web Activity - REST API Calls
Set Variable Activity - 
Append Variable Activity - 
Lookup Activity - 
For Each Activity - Looping items within a pipeline
Databricks Notebook - attach a databricks notebook to run spark jobs
Execute Pipeline - allows one pipeline to invoke and execute another pipeline. Modularization.

• What is a Dataset?
A Dataset represents the actual data you're working with. For example a file in a blob storage or a table in database.

• What is a Linked Service?
A Linked Service Stores the connection info and credentials for external resources. 
These external resources can be data stores such as Azure Blob Storage, Azure SQL Database, Snowflake, Amazon S3, or on-premises SQL Server
or compute services like Azure Databricks, Azure HDInsight, or Azure Batch.

Every linked service must point to an Integration Runtime to execute operations or connect to a data store. 
If you do not explicitly assign one, it will automatically use the Default Azure Integration Runtime

• What is the difference between a linked service and a dataset?

A linked service defines how to connect to an external system.
A Dataset defines what data to use within that system.

• What is an integration Runtime? 
Integration Runtime is the compute infrastructure that ADF uses to execute activities. IR = the “engine” that actually runs your pipelines.
IR is used for Data Flow, Data Movement, Activity Dispatch and SSIS Package Execution.

• How many types of IR are there. When to use which?
Types of IR:
There are 3 types of IR:

Azure IR, Self-Hosted IR and Azure SSIS IR.

Azure IR:
Azure IR is the fully managed, serverless compute in ADF. It is used for cloud-to-cloud data movement or within the cloud data transformations in a public network.
ADF provides a default Azure IR called AutoResolveIntegrationRuntime with the nearest location to the data sink for faster access. 
You can manually create an Azure IR and choose the desired location.

When to use Azure IR?
Use Azure IR when data movement/transformation requirement is within cloud and you don't want to manage Infrastructure

Self-Hosted IR:

Self-Hosted IR is used for Data movement and Activity dispatch between cloud and on-premises machines or virtual machine inside a private network.
For example on-prem sql server to ADLS. It acts as a bridge between ADF and you private data.
Self-hosted IR compute environmnt is installed on an on-premises machine or a virtual machine inside a private network.
You have to manually manage infra.

When to use Self-Hosted IR?
When you want to connect ADF to on-prem machines or virtual machines in a private network, or azure resources with public network access disabled or when you need
custom connectors

What is Linked Self-Hosted IR (also called shared self-hosted IR)?
Through SHIR, only one instance of ADF can be connected to an on-premises machine but with Shared SHIR, multiple ADF instances can access.

Azure SSIS IR:
Azure SSIS IR is used to lift and shift SSIS workloads to Azure. It is a fully managed cluster of Azure VMs specifically dedicated to run SSIS packages in Azure.
The Azure-SSIS IR can be provisioned in either public network or private network.

When to use Azure SSIS IR?
When you want to lift and shift SSIS workloads to Azure.

• How does Azure Data Factory handle data movement between cloud and on-premise environments?
Azure Data Factory enables secure data movement between cloud and on-premise environments through the Self-hosted Integration Runtime (IR), 
which acts as a bridge between ADF and on-premise data sources.

• What is Activity Dispatch?
Activity dispatch is the process by which ADF dispatches a transformation to an external compute instead of carrying out itself. 
It dispatches the activity, monitors it and tracks it progress. For example a Azure Databricks Notebook Job or Stored procedure Activities dispatched to 
Azure SQL.

Activity dispatch in Azure Data Factory (ADF) is the process by which the Integration Runtime (IR) delegates and coordinates the execution of external transformation
tasks. Instead of processing the data directly, ADF sends the command to an external compute engine, monitors its execution, and tracks its success or failure


• What is a trigger?
A trigger defines when a pipeline should run. You can configure a trigger to run on a schedule, in response to an event like file arrival, 
or you can run it manually.

• What are the types of ADF triggers? When to use which?

There are three types od triggers in ADF. Schedule Triggers, Tumbling Window Triggers and Event based Triggers.

Schedule Triggers:
A Scheduled trigger runs periodically at a scheduled time. For example you can schedule a trigger to run a pipeline everyday at 10:00 am.
Can only be scheduled for a future time to start
Trigger to pipeline relationship is many to many. This means a single trigger can invoke many pipelines.
Simillarly a single pipeline can be invoked by multiple triggers.

Event based Triggers:
Runs pipeline in respond to an event like file arrival. Trigger to pipeline relationship is many to many.

Tumbling window Triggers:
A tumbling window trigger runs at specific time intervals. These time intervals or windows are fixed size, contiguous and are non-overlapping.
For example, when you want to ingest data generated between 10-12 am or Use TWT when you have to pull data generated in specific time interval, 
say - pull the files uploaded in Azure storage between 2PM to 3PM, then 3PM to 4PM and so on.
It can be scheduled for past windows/slices. Trigger to pipeline relation is one-to-one.
It is primarily used to process data in batches, run historical data loads (backfilling), and build trigger-to-trigger dependencies

• Difference between schedule trigger and tumbling window trigger? When to use which?

1. Schedule trigger runs at a particular time while a tumbling window trigger runs at particular time-slots.
2. Trigger to pipeline relationship is many to many in case of schedule triggers while it is one-to-one in case of tumbling window triggers.
3. Scheduled triggers do not retain past state. Tumbling window retain past states. Hence you can use tumbling window triggers to run pipelines for a past date
4. There is no trigger dependency in schedules triggers. There can be trigger dependency in case of Tumbling Window Triggers.

Use Schedule Trigger when you want to trigger pipeline run on a specific time.
Use Tumbling window when you want to process data in batches, run historical data loads (backfilling), and build trigger-to-trigger dependencies.

• What are the steps to create a copy activity pipeline in ADF?

1. Go to pipelines and create a new pipeline. Give it a name.
2. Drag and drop copy activity from activities.
3. Select the source and sink dataset. If they do not exist, create them. 
   Create the required linked service and select the required IR.
4. Debug to see results

1. create linked services for the source and sink
2. create datasers for source and sink
3. create a pipeline with copy activity and use the source dataset and sink dataset.
4. click on debug to see the results

• What are parameters and variables in ADF? What is the difference between them?

parameters are external values passed into pipelines, datasets or linked services. The value cannot be changed inside a pipeline.
variables are internal values set inside a pipeline. The value can be changed inside the pipeline using Set Variable or 
append variable activity

parameters are immutable whereas variables are mutable.

For example parameters such as file path or table name is passed down a pipeline whereas variables are used  as counters, tracking filenames in a loop, or holding 
calculation results.

• What is a Dynamic content in ADF? What is its use?
Dynamic content in ADF are expressions which are used to dynamically assign values (like file paths, table names, or parameters) during pipeline execution 
instead of hardcoding them.

• How to get the previous activity output value in another activity? 
First, we need to connect both activities, then we need to add dynamic content in the Expression of the 2nd activity then we can choose which value to get.

• What is Metadata Driven Pipeline? How to implement it?

In metadata driven pipeline, ADF uses an external configuration such as a json file or to dynamically control the execution of pipelines.
This ensures pipelines reusability avoiding hardcoding of file path or file name etc. 

The pipeline reads the config file through lookup activity and a foreach activity iterates over them invoking a pipeline.

• What is Data Flow?
Data Flow: A visual tool for designing data transformations (ETL/ELT) on a large scale, using Spark under the hood.

• When to use data flow? When not to use data flow?

Use data flow when you want to transform your data without any codes.
Do not use Data Flow when you want tight control over the data which will require spark code or when you already have access to Azure Databricks Notebooks.
 
What is the difference between copy activity and Data Flow?
While the ADF Copy Activity simply moves data from one place to another exactly as it is, a Data Flow allows you to alter, reshape, clean, and enrich the data 
dynamically while it is in transit.

----------------- Azure Databricks -----------------------
• How to enable usage of  Azure Databricks in Azure?
1. Create Azure Databricks workspace as a new resource.
2. Create ADB Cluster
3. Create ADB Linked Service
4. Create ADB Notebook Activity to orchestrate Spark Transformation Jobs

We have to create an Azure Databricks workspace as new resource, create an ADB cluster and then we can use the ADB notebooks for Spark codes.

• How does ADF trigger Databricks notebooks?
ADF triggers Databricks notebooks through Databricks Notebook Activity

• What type of clusters are used to execute DB Notebook Activity?
Job Clusters are used to execute DB Notebook Activity.

• How to access ADLS Gen2 through Databricks?

1. Directly using Storage Account key in spark config
2. Mounting ADLS in Databricks using dbutils.fs.mount command. This requires a service principle and secrets to be kept in Azure key-vault.
3. Using Unity Catalog external storage location feature. This requires a storage credential having access to the Azure Storage Account.

	1. Using Storage Account Key (Easy and fast but less secure. Not recommended for production)

	We can directly pass the storage account key to our spark session through config to access ADLS.
	This is the easiest but least secure method, primarily used for quick, interactive exploration rather than production.

	spark.conf.set(
		"fs.azure.account.key.storage_account_name.dfs.core.windows.net",
		dbutils.secrets.get(scope="scope-name", key="secret-key")
	)

	# Read directly
	df = spark.read.csv("abfss://container_name@storage_account_name.dfs.core.windows.net/file.csv")

	2. Using Service Principal + Key-vault 
	We create a service principal to grant access to the storage account and then use that service principal to create a mount in databricks 
	using dbutils.fs.mount command. This is the best approach for production if unity catalog is not enabled.
	
	Pros: Secure with RBAC (Role based Access Control)
	Cons: Requires secrets management. Legacy pattern. Unity Catalog external location is recommended.

	Detailed Steps:

	Create service principal:
	Go to Microsoft Entra ID and register an APP to get a Client ID, Tenant ID, and Client Secret.
	
	Grant Service Principal storage account access:
	Assign the Storage Blob Data Contributor role to this app on your ADLS Gen2 account. Store your secrets securely in an Azure Key Vault, and create a 
	Key Vault-backed secret scope in Databricks.
	
	How to Use the Scope Secrets in Notebooks?
	# Fetch secret securely without exposing passwords in plain text
	dbutils.secrets.get(scope="your-scope-name", key="your-keyvault-secret-name")
	
	Create a mount in databricks using dbutils.fs.mount command:
	configs = {
	  "fs.azure.account.auth.type": "OAuth",
	  "fs.azure.account.oauth.provider.type": "org.apache.hadoop.fs.azurebfs.oauth2.ClientCredsTokenProvider",
	  "fs.azure.account.oauth2.client.id": dbutils.secrets.get(scope="<your-scope>", key="client-id"),
	  "fs.azure.account.oauth2.client.secret": dbutils.secrets.get(scope="<your-scope>", key="client-secret"),
	  "fs.azure.account.oauth2.client.endpoint": "https://microsoftonline.com<tenant-id>/oauth2/token"
	}

	dbutils.fs.mount(
	  source = "abfss://<container>@<storage-account>.dfs.core.windows.net/",
	  mount_point = "/mnt/<mount-name>",
	  extra_configs = configs)
	  
	 # Check access 
	 dutils.fs.ls(/mnt/)
	 
	 df = spark.read.parquet("/mnt/<mount-name>")
	 
	 # How to unmount?
	 dbutils.fs.unmount("/mnt/<mount-name>")

	3. Unity Catalog
	
	We can use unity catalog to create an external storage location with a storage credential having access to the Azure Storage Account.
	1. Create a Databricks Access Connector in the Azure Portal and note its resource ID.
	2. Assign the Storage Blob Data Contributor role to the Access Connector on your ADLS Gen2 storage account.
	3. In Databricks Catalog, create a Storage Credential pointing to that managed identity.
	4. Create an External Location that links your Databricks path to your ADLS Gen2 container path. Grant READ/WRITE permissions to users/groups as needed.
	
	No mounts or configs needed. Read/write directly:
	df = spark.read.parquet("abfss://<container>@<storage-account>.dfs.core.windows.net/path/to/data")
    df.write.format("delta").save("abfss://<container>@<storage-account>.dfs.core.windows.net/output")
	
	Pros: Most secure. RBAC + Fine grained access control because of unity catalog
	Cons: Requires Unity Catalog. Not available in older setups.
	
Follow: 
https://community.databricks.com/t5/data-engineering/establishing-a-connection-between-adls-gen2-databricks-and-adf/td-p/141166

• How to mount ADLS in Databricks?
We create a service principal with access to the storage account and use that service principal to mount ADLS in databricks using the dbutils.fs.mount command.
		
• What is a service principal? Difference between service principal and managed identity.
A service principal is a non-human identity created for applications or services to securely access resources in cloud.

A managed identity is a specialized, automated type of service principal that eliminates the need to manually manage security credentials.

• How to create a service principal in microsoft azure?
Go to Microsoft Entra ID and register an APP to get a Client ID, Tenant ID, and Client Secret.

• What is Pipelines dependency and Trigger Dependency?

Pipeline Depndency: 
You can make one pipeline dependent on another by using dependency conditions.

Available Dependency Conditions are: Succeeded, Failed, Skipped, Completed

Let's Consider there is a pipeline dependency A -> B
Suceeded: B will run only when A runs successfully without any errors.
Failed: B will run only when A Fails
Skipped: B will run only when pipeline A is skipped
Completed: B will run only when A either succeeds or fails


Trigger Dependency: 
You can make only tumbling window triggers dependent on each other. Tumbling window triggers can be self-dependant too.

• Retry and Error handling
 - Retry Policy
 - Timeout
 - Dependency Conditions:
    Success, Failure, Completion and Skip
 - Failure Path
 
Interview Question: What happends when one table fails among 200 tables. 

• Logging Framework

 - Implement pipeline logging
 - Audit Tables
 - Execution Tracking
 Track:
 Rows processed
 Execution Status
 Duration
 Error Message
 

• Parallel processing
batch count
For each parallelism
concurrency



• Monitoring

What do we want to monitor?
Trigger Runs, Pipeline Runs, Activity Runs, Azure Data Factory Resource, Integration Runtime

How to create alerts?
Go to monitor -> Under Notifications find alerts and metrics. Add a new alert.

We use Monitor tab for monitoring triggers and pipelines

What is Azure Monitor?
Azure monitor is used to store and analyze logs and metrics for activity, pipeline and trigger runs.
It can also be used to send the logs and metrics to Log Analytics Workspace.


• CI/CD and deployment:
 - Git Integration
 - Branching
 - ARM templates
 - Environment Deployment
 - Azure Devops - dev.azure.com
 
What is CI/CD?

CI/CD Stands for Continuous Integration and Continuous Delivery.

Continous Integration: 
Continously integrating individual developer's code into one source control system such as git and immediately running automated builds 
and tests to verify those changes.

Continous Deployment: Continously Deploying the tested and released code into production environment.

All Objects in ADF can be represented by a json file.

ARM Template: You build ADF projects using ARM templates. 
An ARM (Azure Resource Manager) Template is a JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) file that defines the infrastructure and configuration for your Azure environment. 
It utilizes declarative syntax, allowing you to state what you want to deploy.


 
• ADF optimization: How do you improve ADF performance?

Copy Activity Optimization:
Increase parallelism
Increase DIU(Data Integration Unit)
Partition Huge Data 
Use staged Copy - Write to Blob → then load to DW
Increase batch count in ForEach Activity


• Security
 - RBAC
 - Managed identity
 - Private Endpoints
 - Azure Key Vault
 
 




 