What is ADF?
A Fully managed, serverless data integration solution for ingesting, preparing, and transforming all of your data at once.

ADF doesn't support streaming workloads, but it can run databricks notebook where structured streaming or autoloader is used.

Azure Databases:
Azure SQL Database - For SQL Server 
Azure MySQL Database
Azure Postgres Database etc

Azure Storage Account:
Azure provides a variety of storage solutions under one umbrella called Azure Storage Account.

1. Blob Storage - For unstructured data text files, pdf, media
2. Files Storage - cloud file storage
3. Disk Storage - for virtual machine disks
4. Table Storage
5. Queue Storage

What is Azure Data Lake Storage Gen2?

Azure Data Lake Storage Gen2 (ADLS Gen2) is Microsoft's scalable cloud storage for big data analytics, built on Azure Blob Storage.

Feautures:
1. Built on top of blob storage
2. Hierarchial namespace
3. Hadoop Compatibility
4. Enhanced security
5. Optimized for Analytics

ADF Core Concepts:
Pipeline
Activity
Dataset
Linked Service
Integration Runtime
Data Flow
Trigger

Pipeline: A logical grouping of activities that together perform a task (e.g., move data from Source A to Sink B).
Activity: An action performed within a pipeline, such as copying data (Copy Activity) or transforming it (Data Flow Activity).
Dataset: A named view of data that points to the data you want to use as input or output for activities (e.g., a specific file in Blob Storage or a table in SQL).
Linked Service: Stores the connection string and credentials for an external resource, acting as a connection string to your data stores or compute.
Integration Runtime (IR): The compute infrastructure that ADF uses to execute activities, bridging connectivity between ADF and data sources (Azure, self-hosted, SSIS).
Data Flow: A visual tool for designing data transformations (ETL/ELT) on a large scale, using Spark under the hood.
Trigger: Defines when a pipeline should run (e.g., on a schedule, in response to an event like file arrival, or manually)

Copy Activity:
Copy Activity is used to copy/move data between a source and a destination.

Suppose you want to copy a file in a blob storage to an ADLS Gen2 storage. How to do copy activity? What will be required?

We need to define the following.

linked services for connection to blob and adls gen2
source dataset and destination dataset
pipeline to run the copy activity

How to create a linked service?
1. Click on manage. Click new to create a new linked service. 
2. Select Azure Blob Storage. Give a name.(ls_name)
3. Select Integration Run time, Authentication method(Conection String, or Azure Key Vault)
4. Select your Azure subscription and storage account
5. Test your connection.

How to create a dataset?
1. Go to Author(Pencil Icon).
2. Go to Datasets and create a new Dataset.
3. Select the dataset type. In this case, select csv.  Give a name (ds_name)
4. select the linked service.
5. select file path

How to create a pipeline?
1. Go to Author. Pipelines. Create a new pipeline
2. Give a pipeline name and description
3. Go to activities and drag and drop copy data activity
4. In the general tab give the pipeline a name, description, timeout, retry etc
5. Go to source and select the source dataset that you have created. Or create a new one.
6. Go to Sink and select the sink dataset.
7. Click on debug to run the pipeline. Publish to save.

ADF Activities:
Copy activity
Validation Activity: Check if file exists before running a pipeline
Get Metadata
If condition
Delete activity

Q.How to get the previous activity value in another activity? 
A. First, we need to connect both activities, then we need to add dynamic content in the Expression of the 2nd activity.


ADF Triggers:

1. Schedule Triggers -
2. Tumbling Window Triggers
3. Event based/storage based Triggers - Runs pipeline in respond to an event like file arrival
4. Custom Triggers

Schedule Triggers:
- Scheduled triggers runs periodically at a scheduled time. For example you can schedule a trigger to run a pipeline everyday at 10:00 am.
- Can only be scheduled for a future time to start
- Trigger to pipeline relationship is many to many. This means a single trigger can invoke many pipelines.
Simillarly a single pipeline can be invoked by multiple triggers.

Tumbling window Triggers:
- Tumbling window triggers runs at periodic intervals.
- Windows are fixed size non-overlapping
- Can be scheduled for past windows/slices
- trigger to pipeline relation is one-to-one

Use TWT when you have to pull data generated in specific time interval, say - pull the files uploaded in Azure storage between 2PM to 3PM, 
then 3PM to 4PM and so on... TWT allows you to use start time and end time which can be used to filter the source data based on generation time. 
It can also be used to backfill the data.

Event based Triggers
- Runs pipeline in respond to an event like file arrival
- many to many relationship

Q. Difference between schedule trigger and tumbling window trigger? When to use which?

------ Data Ingestion case and deaths data covid 19 ------------
Data Ingestion from HTTP: http linked service is used to retrieve data from a specified URL

Objective: We want to copy the data present in a url to an adls location.

steps:
1. Create an http linked service.
2. Create the http source dataset. select csv file format.
3. Create adls gen2 sink dataset. choose file format as csv. Give path for the sink folder. 
4. Create a new pipeline.
5. Inside the pipeline, create the copy activity. Use the source dataset and sink dataset as created above.
6. Click on debug 

----- Pipeline Variables ----








